US and Chinese defense chiefs trade barbs over Taiwan at first face-to-face meeting
Singapore (CNN)US and Chinese military chiefs sparred over the issue of Taiwan in their first face-to-face meeting on Friday at a major defense summit in Singapore, with Washington saying Beijing is trying to change the status quo over the island and Beijing claiming Washington is fueling instability with its actions including arms sales to Taipei.
The US is committed to its One China policy, Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin told his Chinese counterpart, Gen. Wei Fenghe, but he warned that the Chinese military has become increasingly aggressive, unsafe, and unprofessional in the region, a US defense official said after the meeting at the Shangri-La Dialogue.
The US official said the actions by the People's Liberation Army (PLA) reflect recent statements made by Chinese officials that suggest Beijing may be altering the status quo regarding Taiwan, a democratically controlled island that China claims as its sovereign territory.
"Secretary Austin also raised concerns about ... statements by PLA officials that the Taiwan Strait is not international waters. [People's Republic of China] officials have said that multiple times to the United States over the last several months and that's deeply concerning," the official said.
Reacting specifically to the US statements in a post-meeting briefing, a Chinese military spokesman said it wasn't Beijing that was upsetting a decades-long policy that has provided stability across the Taiwan Strait.
"It is not the mainland that is changing the status quo, it is Taiwan independence forces ... and outside forces that are trying to change the status quo," Senior Col. Wu Qian said at a news conference after the meeting.
A Chinese statement on the meeting said Wei pointed specifically to a recently announced $120 million US arms sale to the island. The new arms sale will cover "spare parts for naval ships and related technical assistance," Taiwan's Defense Ministry said on Thursday.
"The US again announced arms sales to Taiwan, which has seriously undermined China's sovereignty and security interests. China firmly opposes this and strongly condemns it," the Chinese statement said.
The issue of Taiwan took up the bulk of the meeting between Austin and Wei, the US official said.